in forests from Africa to South America
scientists have found monkeys whose
calls refer to predators but do they
ever use sounds for things when they
can't see them when they're just
thinking about them
[Music]
the white-faced capuchin z' in Costa
Rica live by streams full of danger
they're nervous maybe imagining death
lurking under every log or pile of
leaves they too have put sounds to some
of their fears and have different calls
for different predators a call gave up
snake the whole truth leaps out of the
water and up into the trees they soon
calm down once noticed most predators
are of little danger the warning system
is built on trust and honesty yet very
occasionally some monkeys deliberately
shout an alarm call when there is no
snake there the reason for this
deception lies in the fact that monkey
society is very competitive the leaders
often take food from subordinates the
problem for a low status monthly is not
just finding food it's hanging onto it
and sometimes they have to be a little
crafty suppose a subordinate is acting a
little strangely watching the others
closely he then could without any
obvious panic calls
snake and everybody leaps out of the
water while the others are looking for
snakes he could sneak down and recover a
fallen bird's leg he could have been
hiding
the leaders slowly returned to the pool
it seems that lying may be as old as
language itself if our little
manipulator is spotted with his egg he's
in big trouble this sort of deception
has been noticed in several species it
shows they imagine things when they're
not visible and it implies that they're
beginning to think about what each other
may be thinking about